Accompanying this letter is our revised manuscript, titled "Generalized
measurement invariance tests with application to factor analysis."  We found the
reviews to be very helpful and believe the paper has improved considerably as a
result.  

The main addition to the manuscript is an application of our proposed tests to a
four-group model with mean structure in a study of stereotype threat by
Wicherts, Dolan, and Hessen (2005), as suggested by Reviewer 1.  We elected to
use this real example to supplement, vs replace, the artificial example. While
the real application allows us to illustrate how the tests can be adapted to
specific challenges, the artificial example is more flexible in the illustration
of other general aspects of the tests. Also, it serves as a gateway to the
simulation.  We are willing to streamline this further if you or the reviewers
feel that there is too much redundancy between the artificial and the real
example, however.
README

Furthermore, we have added some theory for the study of local alternatives as
well as details on the use of our methods with categorical V, the ability of our
methods to handle multiple groups models and mean structure, and the
relationship of our methods to mixture models and moderated factor models. 

We look forward to receiving feedback on the manuscript.

Sincerely,
Ed Merkle


Editor Comments

Comment E.1. While I share the reviewers generally positive view of your paper,
I find myself in the unusual position of being less enthusiastic about the
present version of the paper than the reviewers seem to be.  One reason for this
is that I think that your method is much less practical than the reviewers do,
chiefly because in practical applications of invariance work, it is unusual to
encounter a case in which V is continuous. The one exception to this situation
is when V is age, but even then, in the context of employment discrimination for
example, legal considerations often demand an arbitrary split on 40 years, or
some other such threshold (which is admittedly arbitrary, but is demanded by the
law).  

Response E.1. Though we did not highlight it in the paper, the methods can be
used with categorical V.  We now briefly describe several strategies for
handling ordinal data in the Discussion.  Additionally, we would argue that many
applications of invariance do not use continuous V because methods for handling
continuous V are still emerging (e.g., the moderated factor models discussed by
Reviewer 1).  We believe that our proposed methods will encourage further
invariance research involving continuous V.


Comment E.2. The second point is related to issues raised by Reviewers one and
four.  In any invariance analyses, some elements of theta are allowed to vary
across groups freely because they are not part of the invariance constraints
dictated by equation 7.  In the factor model, the factor means and factor
covariance elements are not constrained.  How is this fact represented in your
method?  While I saw your treatment of partial invariance (i.e., hold some
elements to invariance while letting other elements go free), you seem in that
context to be testing invariance in all of the free elements.  Does your method
allow one to permit some elements to be unconstrained, while others are
invariant, without looking for violations of invariance in the free elements? 
If it does, we need to see how this works.  

Response E.2. This comment focuses on the fact that our methods generally work
from a "reduced model" standpoint, whereby all model parameters are constrained
to be equal and we examine the stability of parameter estimates across
individuals (or across groups).  When groups are not known in advance (e.g.,
when V is continuous), this appears to be the only way to proceed.

However, if groups are known in advance, it is possible to employ the proposed
methods in tandem with a multiple-group model.  The multiple-group model can
then handle both unconstrained and invariant parameters, because scores can be
computed for all model parameters.  We now illustrate this approach in the data
example. 


Comment E.3. You also did not mention how model identification constraints,
which in the invariance case are sometimes invariance constraints, are
handled.  

Response E.3. The proposed tests are based on scores associated with all free
parameters.  Thus, it is straightforward to handle parameters that are
constrained to be equal to one another.  However, this comment may also refer to
the fact that one's choice of identification constraint will influence tests of
other free parameters.  We now briefly describe this issue in the "Use in
Practice" section of the Discussion.  


Comment E.4. I think that we need to have a real example, as suggested by
Reviewer one.  This would allow you to answer my second point above, and also
show that your method can give answers that are sensible in context.  With a
real example, you could drop the artificial one (but keep the simulations).
Having a real example would also help to illustrate that there are real
applications in which your method would prove useful.

Response E.4. As discussed in the introduction above, we have added a real
example and hope that it brings out more clearly how the proposed tests can
be adapted to some of the challenges you and the reviewers raised. However,
we have also kept the artificial example because we feel that some of the basic
properties of the tests are easier to illustrate under controlled conditions.
README


Reviewer #1

Comment 1.1. The section on the asymptotic properties of the Beta-function on
pages 11-14 was still quite hard to follow. The authors may want to expand upon
some of the more technical aspects of these models to allow more readers to
grasp how they would do the job in their given application.

Response 1.1. We have revised the theory development and added extra detail to
the text.  If some specific concepts are still unclear, we are happy to revisit
this section.  


Comment 1.2. There are clear links between the current approach based on an
observed continuous grouping variable V and the factor mixture approach. In
factor mixture modeling, the grouping variable that characterizes the subgroups
that differ in terms of particular model parameters are also typically unknown
(i.e., latent classes), but class membership can be predicted on the basis of
observed predictor(s). So the model in Figure 1 and the scenario of 2 subgroups
that the authors describe on pages 17-20 is essentially a factor mixture model
with two latent classes in which age predicts class membership. Therefore, the
authors should take steps to relate their modeling approach to factor mixture
modeling. 

Response 1.2. We agree and have now described our methods' relationship to
mixture models in the Discussion.  Some advantages of our approach include the
facts that it does not require a priori specification of the number of latent
classes or a priori specification of the way by which age impacts class
membership.


Comment 1.3. Similarly, there exist a family of moderation-type factor models
that may serve the same purpose of studying failures of invariance in common
factor models with respect to (unknown) "grouping" variables. For instance,
Dylan Molenaar, Conor Dolan and colleagues have recently worked out CFA models
that were based on Shaun Purcell's work in which certain parameters are
moderated by either observed or unobserved variables. These models too could be
applied to the important problems related to invariance with respect to unknown
groups although they may not work as well as do mixture models and the current
approach when indeed there is some step function that describes the violations
of invariance. The existence of these alternative approaches by no means
diminishes the potential value of the current developments, but it does mean
that the authors should discuss the relation between their approach and other
existing methods.

Response 1.3. We now describe factor analysis models employing moderation in the
"Comparison to other methods" section of the discussion.  


Comment 1.4. The authors chose to simulate data only under models that did not
include the mean structure. Since violations of measurement invariance with real
data are most often related to the mean structure (to be sure due to larger
power associated with modeling first-order moments), it may be more realistic
and interesting to have scenarios in which such types of failures of invariance
(called uniform measurement bias) occur.

Response 1.4. Mean parameters were estimated and tested in the simulation
models, though they were unstructured.  Mean structures are often made possible
by constraining parameters across groups, and our simulation focuses on a case
where groups cannot be predefined.  Thus, we have not modified the model in the
simulation but point out more clearly what the 19 parameters in the model are.
In the real data example that we have added, however, the mean structure is
utilized. 
README

Comment 1.5. Also, many "nuisance" variable that are hypothesized to affect
indicators, say, in cognitive testing (e.g., see Wicherts et al.'s work on
measurement invariance and stereotype threat) in a given multi-group CFA are
expected to linearly affect these indicators. Now I can come up with a host of
scenarios in which the measurement bias is approximately linear and so can be
modeled in simple terms because the regression on V results in an additional
factor in the model.  Surely I don't expect the authors to deal with all of such
potential scenarios' of failures of measurement invariance in CFA. However, I do
wish to point out that underlying the current approach is a specific kind of
measurement bias that is expected to be discontinuous while many failures of
invariance are expected to be continuous and approximately linear. Therefore,
the authors should go into more detail on the nature of the measurement bias
that the approach is trying to uncover. Their approach may be generic, but it is
not really general in the sense that many failures of strict factorial
invariance can be modeled in more straightforward and traditional ways. The step
function in Eq. 10 should be discussed in more detail and may be supplemented by
a hypothetical example of why it occurs in linear factor models.

Response 1.5. The step function from Equation 10 is employed as an illustrative
example because it highlights the connection between nested model comparisons
and the proposed techniques. Also, the maxLM statistic from Equation 17 has
particularly high power for this scenario. However, the proposed tests typically
have non-trivial power for all (non-constant) deviation patterns theta(v_i)
(considered in Equation 9).  We have now provided more details on these issues
in the Discussion section (and tied the details to Comment/Response 1.3).  


Comment 1.6. On page 3, the authors state that failures of measurement
invariance render scales useless, but this statement may be overly strong.
Specifically, scales that are only partially invariant  may still be useful. In
addition, the statement that "the scales are the sole cause of the differences"
appears to suggest that failures of invariance can explain all group differences
in observed test scores, which is seldom the case. Failures of measurement
invariance do not preclude the existence of group differences in the
distribution of latent factors scores.

Response 1.6. We agree that these statements were too strong and have revised
accordingly.  


Comment 1.7. When presenting the definition of invariance on page 5, the authors
may wish to indicate that the definition (due originally to Mellenbergh, 1989)
implies (as shown by Meredith, 1993) that not all of the parameters in the CFA
are invariant but only the measurement parameters. So factor means, factor
covariances, and (in structural models) factor regression weights are not
expected to be invariant under this definition of invariance. Another issue that
could be discussed is that non-normality in the data may lead to spurious
findings in the current approach just like they do in regular multi-group
confirmatory analyses and in factor mixture modeling (e.g., see work by Gitta
Lubke and Michael Neale).

Response 1.7. We now describe the invariance definitions in more detail, and we
also clarify that our methods are not necessarily robust to violations of
normality.  


Comment 1.8. Finally, it may be interesting to apply the method to real data and
to compare the outcomes from more traditional modeling approaches. After all, in
real life the exact nature of the measurement bias with respect to V is not
know. One interesting approach may be to use data from experiments like in the
stereotype threat framework that was used by Wicherts et al. (who I am sure will
be happy to share raw data for this purpose).

Response 1.8. See Response E.4.  


Reviewer #3

Comment 3.1. The result from Hjort and Koning is a nice trick to rewrite the
asymptotic representation of the likelihood estimator as an empirical process.
This then relates the cumulative sums of the likelihood estimator to a Brownian
bridge. The weak convergence of the monitoring process is of course asymptotic.
The properties of the tests in the current manuscript are investigated decently
enough for medium to large sample sizes (n = 100 to 500). However, for small
samples no results are obtained. Given the relatively small model in the
simulations, I would expect a relatively small sample size of n = 50 to be
included in the simulations. The main reason is that this may show a point where
the power functions show a "breakdown."

Response 3.1. We now include the n=50 condition in the simulations, which indeed
exhibits a breakdown in the sense that power is not monotonic with respect to
violation magnitude.  


Comment 3.2. The weak convergence of the monitoring process is proved in the
paper by Hjort and Koning in two cases: (i) for theta_0 the true parameter, and
(ii)   for local alternatives O(1/sqrt(n)) from theta_0. In the latter case the
monitoring process is shown to be a Brownian bridge including a constant (bias)
even when using -E{u'u}, Fisher's information (which is consistent up to
O(1/n)). I would imagine this is important since model misspecification
(measurement invariance) is the topic of the manuscript. This result allows the
authors to to determine exactly what the result of misspecification is. It fits
well with their line of reasoning, which I agree with. The misspecification is
determined by a deviation h/sqrt(n) of the true parameter. This corresponds
exactly to the misspecification in the simulations. Measurement invariance can
be imagined as a latent variable acting on the factor loadings, and can
therefore be incorporated in the parameter theta. If there were no measurement
invariance, theta_v woold be 0, but in the case of misspecification, it is
exactly the same as that of Hjort and Koning. I would recommend that the authors
use this result by Hjort and Koning in the manuscript to show analytically what
happens to the distribution and tests.

Response 3.2. We have now incorporated these results in a new section, titled
"Local alternatives".  We also discuss these results in the context of the
simulation, showing the impact of our imposed measurement invariance violation
on the Brownian bridge.  


We addressed all minor issues identified by Reviewer 3.  We have a response to
one of these issues:

Comment 3.3. p. 7 second paragraph: Assuming that the model is correctly
specified is bonus when the second point above is incorporated. I think this
would improve the manuscript.

Response 3.3. Violations of distributional assumptions may still cause problems
with the proposed tests, even if the "structure" of the model (e.g., parameter
constraints, included variables, etc) is correct.  We have modified this section
of text accordingly.  


Reviewer #4

Comment 4.1. Page 6/7:	It could be emphasized that a known cutpoint nu means
"observed heterogeneity" and an unknown cutpoint nu means "unobserved
heterogeneity". 

Response 4.1. We have now added this detail.  


Comment 4.2. Page 9:	The authors should give a reference or a short
explanation of the "tied-down Bessel process". Readers might be unfamiliar
with the process.

Response 4.2. We now note that Andrews (1993) provides results and references
relevant to Bessel processes and also included a forward reference to later
sections. Then, in the "Critical Values & p-values" section, we then state a
brief formal definition of the process (sup_t (t * (1 - t))^{-1} ||B^0(t)||^2)
and point to Hansen (1997) where simulations for critical values are discussed
in detail.


Comment 4.3. Page 10:	To test for changes "along" V means that V is always
continuous (also mentioned in the first paragraph). What happens if V is an
ordered categorical variable? Would that be a special case? Adding a reference
to the discussion section would be helpful. 

Response 4.3. We have added some discussion on the use of categorical V.  Also
see Response E.1.


Comment 4.4. Page 19:	The overall k=19 model parameter consists of six factor
loadings, six measurement errors and one covariance between the factors. The
authors refer to the six means of the manifest variables. Usually, in factor
models mean differences of the factors are of research interest. The authors
should give some information why they considered the manifest means instead of
the latent mean differences.

Response 4.4. Factor means can be estimated if one is constraining other model
parameters to be equal across groups.  In our new data example, we do estimate
factor means and use them in the proposed tests.  In our simulation we use a
scenario where no grouping variables exist (i.e., there is only a continuous
V).  In this scenario, it seems difficult to estimate factor means prior to
model estimation because we cannot constrain parameters across groups.  We have
added some extra detail to the simulation section on our use of a single-group
model.  


Comment 4.5.	The simulations later on focus on invariance of factor loadings.
Basicly, the covariance structure in the simulations are analyzed with the
factor model of Figure 1. So, means are not included in the analyses (as far as
I read the simulation results correctly). 

Response 4.5. Mean parameters are included in the casewise likelihood function,
though they were unmodeled in the simulation and thus omitted from Figure 1. 
The casewise likelihood function is needed to make the proposed tests possible. 
Also see Comment/Response 1.5.  


Comment 4.6. Page 25: 	Implications of the study of measurement invariance in
factor analysis to general structural equation models could be added with
comments to mean differences (see comment for page 19). 

Response 4.6. We have added some brief discussion surrounding extensions to
structural equation models.  


Comment 4.7. Table 1:	Table captions should be moved to the bottom of the
table. (Abbreviations: ...)

Response 4.7. We have moved the Abbreviations part of the captions.
