Score-Based Tests of Measurement Invariance with Respect to Continuous and Ordinal Variables
Achin Zeileis, Edgar C. Merkle, Ting Wang

The issue of measurement invariance commonly arises in psychometric models and
is typically assessed via likelihood ratio tests, Lagrange multiplier tests, and
Wald tests, all of which require advance definition of the number of groups,
group membership, and offending model parameters. We present a family of
recently-proposed measurement invariance tests that are based on the scores of a
fitted model (i.e., observation-wise derivatives of the log-likelihood with
respect to the model parameters). This family can be used to test for
measurement invariance w.r.t. a continuous auxiliary variable, without
pre-specification of subgroups. Moreover, the family can be used when one wishes
to test for measurement invariance w.r.t. an ordinal auxiliary variable,
yielding test statistics that are sensitive to violations that are monotonically
related to the ordinal variable (and less sensitive to non-monotonic
violations). The tests can be viewed as generalizations of the Lagrange
multiplier (or score) test and they are especially useful for identifying
subgroups of individuals that violate measurement invariance (without
prespecified thresholds) and identifying specific parameters impacted by
measurement invariance violations. If applied recursively to subgroups,
the tests can also be employed for fitting model-based trees that identify
subgroups that do not have (significant) remaining violations of measurement
invariance. We illustrate how the tests can be applied in practice to different
psychometric packages in R.
